if you could uh start there thank you
very much okay um welcome everyone I am
going to call to order the town of andov
board of selectman meeting um for Monday
May 13th and our agenda calls this a
special meeting but it is not a special
meeting it is a regularly scheduled
monthly
meeting um we're going to start with uh
the Pledge of Allegiance
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one nation
under God indivisible with liberty and
justice for
all thank you very much um we're g to
move on to item two public speak uh and
we'll start with Jeff
Ballard I want to thank the board of
Selectmen um for supporting the
community garden we seem to be making a
lot of progress um I am here tonight to
request um the
original um fence proposal which was 10
feet from the front front of the
beds um I gotten at the at the the last
meeting it was okay to put the fence
five feet away from the front of the
beds I'm asking for an additional five
feet in front of the beds uh to give us
access for vehicles from the rear um for
composting for bringing in soil for a
small truck to be able to access the
community garden I've
already um at the time that I requested
the five feet it was not staked out uh
where the leeching field was that was
previous to um the senior center getting
um their their leeching field
established where they had staked it out
and uh speaking with dad King the day
that it was that that was approved for
the town um I was clear with him about
what I could and couldn't do um I am not
I am staying five feet away from the
leeching field with any post holes and I
showed built and and constructed a model
for how I'm going to get around uh the
corner of the leeching field that is
affected and on top of the
ground okay
all right I I do believe we have that on
the agenda so um we'll deal with that
um okay we will move on to Michael and
Kathy pazi uh before we get going um
Mike uh thank you very much for all the
you know I know we gave your wife some
um props at our town meeting but we also
need to give you some some props for all
the time and hard work you've put in
you've been involved in the uh the car
program for as long as I've been
involved and and I know it's probably
another 10 or 15 years so thank you very
much for everything you've done it's not
a problem I enjoy doing it all right uh
you guys got anything else you want to
give to us tonight I have nothing
nothing no okay all right thank you uh
Linda fish all set all right Diane
grer H can you hear me yes oh you know I
always have problems that no I'm doing
fine no no complaints thank you very
much
okay all right um Bill
pen uh good evening
um I'm here just to for a couple issues
one is to uh um reiterate my support for
eventually getting a trail in on the
Joshua's trust Skinner Hill preserve
proper prop uh the second item I'm I'd
like toh support is the uh is the
proposal for the ebike program that
Erica's Erica's put together uh you know
there there are literally hundreds of
programs similar to this around the
country so you know I think it' be it
it's really showing some Initiative for
a small town like Andover to to go
forward and get something like this in
place and hopefully over the years is uh
uh we can even expand on it but I think
this ties in nicely with our new
community center and having the program
administered and all all that so thank
you for your time all right thank you
Bill uh Christie
McHugh hi sorry trying to loud video
there we go hi um I'm just listening in
tonight because I knew that U one of the
agenda items would be that trail um in
the The Preserve um that's located
immediately behind my house so I
naturally have some concerns I know
there's some other folks on the phone
who are in the same situation as we are
and um want to just raise the concern
that uh that's not something that we
would particularly want here in our
neighborhood okay all right thank
you James
Cole
thanks I am uh here for two reasons one
is to voice my support for the trail
that is proposed to occur on the
Joshua's trust property and the Skinner
Hill preserve and secondly to voice my
support for the ebite program that Eric
Anderson is proposing and I'll leave it
at that all right thank you very
much uh Leanne
Hutchinson yes this
just listening for now thank you all
right Andre rurak I apologize if I
mispronounced
that hello sorry having a bad connection
here my work right now um I'm here to
express my concern about the tray um I
have a little kid that work in my
backyard every day my I have some safety
concerns that kind of people that tra is
ATT track in our backyards since my
backyard is going to be very close to
the
trail as and also some privacy concerns
as well so against the
trail
okay um uh Ed asked but I'm assuming
that's Ed
czzle yeah I can you hear me we can oh
hello yeah okay I had to update my uh
Zoom software here um supporting the
ebike proposal I think if uh our country
our state our town will be much better
off if we get out of our internal
combustion engines and take a bicycle
for a mile to town hall or wherever
we're going in town uh many of us have
worked on the uh bike walk Andover
committee that hopefully we'll get
started back up again and having ebikes
available to especially seniors like
myself will get people healthier as Eric
has explained and also
Al
um it just not only the health benefit
but just the town as a whole to be more
environmentally friendly and green I
think it's a great idea other towns are
doing it cities have been doing it it's
time for Andover to catch up with uh
being able to bike and walk our town the
hills in town allow seniors or require
seniors to have an ebike and you just
use a little bit of it you don't need to
speed like a motorcycle I've been doing
it for years go to meeting on them it's
the best way to do it uh so I support
the ebike proposal for town of Andover
thank you right thank you very much and
then there is a cell phone that is
connected uh ends in
5475 I do not know who that is that's
Leanne that's Leanne hi yes this is
Leanne thanks again okay so she's
connected twice uh did I miss anyone for
public
speak
okay um
uh I'm going to go to 2A which is going
to be additions and deletions because
this is not a special meeting so uh do
we have any additions or deletions uh
from any of the board
members uh I will sit there and make an
addition we need to sit there and talk
about the establishment of a a date for
the charter revision
committee uh
well we need to add the charter revision
committee to the agenda for the purposes
of establishing the uh initial public
hearing second
thought all right all anything else or
do we just well all those in favor I I I
all right do we have anything else that
we need to add or delete from the
agenda Eric is there anything that we
need to add or delete from the agenda
not that I know of Jeff okay
um and actually the item that we did uh
let's put that one
um let's put that as 9e and we'll also U
expand that to discussions of the
charter revision committee and issues
that the board would like them the
committee to address so 9e Charter
revision
Comm
okay all right let's move on uh with
item three board and commission
presentations the library board of
directors is anyone going Diane was that
put on Eric for a reason were they
requesting to be that is me
me that was carried over from last
meeting where you wanted pictures of the
Daniel Bernett clock and I had for I had
had copies forwarded of the packet
concerning the history and Appraisal of
Daniel burnap clock um
and seeking permission for another place
to put it other than the wall to the
right of the library um exit in the
first
floor just as a side thing Jeff when
when do you need a decision on that so
it's being renovated right now or it's
being stored I mean when does the
decision on this need to be made because
I mean I personally don't feel as if we
should sit there and make a decision on
the new community center until we're in
the community center and understand you
know at least a little bit of
understanding of how that building flows
so when do you need a a flat out yes or
no on it's uh on is it's it's being
tabled um the the man that is working on
uh Mr crumb who's rebuilding and
restoring the The Works of the clock
with the proper um weight um material uh
for the brass pulley uh it's on hold uh
and we're not we're requesting a space
in the old community room not in the
Senior Center or or any alternative to
that entrance space he's requesting an
alternative the um for a better traffic
pattern no that's it's it's it's this
has been in the work since last fall and
I expect it to be in the works for a
much longer time all right we'll try not
to have that happen um okay so we'll
move on to item 3B the Garden Club
budget request
I mean that's done we gave you that's
done I'm very I'm I'm let let's let's
talk about the fencing here I'm assuming
that that that's in the so you're you're
asking to expand the uh distance between
the beds and the uh the fence and I'm
assuming you're going to encroach
additionally on not only the septic uh
the leech field but also on the new
community center no no um if if you go
back to when over the first uh proposal
for the fence was probably last fall
before the first of the year um it that
was the original proposal but I could
not not knowing where the the leeching
fields were um because it was never
marked out it was also part of my
request um along with that package for
the budget and uh so I
moved it back five feet to try and stay
away from leeching Fields not knowing
where they were um that King uh from the
Eastern Highlands uh health district has
said that what I propose is not a
problem I yes it brings it five feet
closer to the senior center uh it it
basically follows the uh the the anchor
fence it's there now I had marked it out
and Eric said came to me and said um you
know you got permission for 5 feet and
now you're you've got to go back and get
permission for the extra five feet to
make it to 10 the original
10 okay um Eric I I have to just ask
because you're down there and you're
dealing with and Scott please chime in
um where does are these marked out right
now like the fence lines and where we're
currently at is it all staked in the
ground so you guys see
it correct there is there are markings
there yes okay right they're proposing
to put it okay and so from from your
standpoint the two of you what what are
the what are the negatives of this
additional
request well from my perspective two
things I want to actually minimize the
number of people driving back there
period um I'm not sure I want people
driving
all the way back to the back end of the
community gardens I think we set it up
so they could drive up to the fence of
the community garden but I think trying
to set that place up so you can drive
all the way into the back to me that's
problematic frankly um because even if
you make it 10 feet you know now a car
is a little over eight so you know do
you really want cars backing in there
number one and number two there's a
pretty limited space behind that
building and if you think about all the
the recreation activities that are
likely to be back there as soon as you
put a fence up you're blocking
everything else so it's a question of
allocating space back there and how much
gets allocated to community garden
versus how much gets allocated to the
rest of the community center those are
my two takes on that okay Scott
um right now we have it set up so that
he can back a truck up to the first
bed um you know Eric has some valid
concerns um it it depends on what
everybody else
think I'm only one
voice that's okay that's why we're
asking you you're the most knowledgeable
on the topic I think that
they're I think that they have access to
the beds now okay and we approved five
feet correct yeah last meeting does
anyone want to make a motion to expand
this okay Jeff without hearing a motion
to expand it I would sit there and
recommend to you to sit there and and
and take the five feet and sit there and
put the fence around it appropriately
and um get started because the more we
encroach on the community center which
is a significant ass new asset for the
town um you know
if you know I I would just tell you you
you've gotten approval for for the last
meeting for five feet that's where we're
we're going to stay at right
now okay anybody
else okay uh for appointments
um for a consideration of appointing
three advisory boards for for the senior
in the community
center
um Eric had put these in our in our
package he had
requested three different
groups to advise the new uh
employee the recommission a five person
senior Advisory board and the community
center advis advisory
committee now I am not suggesting that
you do that at this meeting No I gave
you a couple people that might be
appropriate for those commissions that I
thought would probably want to serve on
it um I'm just giving you the outline so
that when we have a community a senior
community center director in place The
Advisory committees are all ready to go
and they can just plug in and work with
that person well the question is do we
want one advisory committee or we want
three separate ones and your
recommendation is three separate ones to
advise on three separate topics to the
individual that's my guess what would be
what would be the reason for three
separate advisory boards because we're
essentially giving this person Three
Hats Senior Center Director Community
Center Director Rec Center
Director um
is if we keep it three
separate entities is this how I'm trying
to understand is this person GNA meet
with them or are they
gonna yeah I would presume they'd meet
with them you know once or twice a month
with each board
sure um I I I don't have a problem how
Eric laid it out I I worry about who's
in control of when they tell this
individual what to
do their advisory boards it doesn't get
done they're going to end up coming back
to the board of
Selectmen or to Eric and sit there and
complain especially from a negative
perspective so uh
but to be really honest Eric's logic is
is sound because he's really breaking it
down to the recreation committee uh the
rec commit Rec commission would
control Sports and and and different
community activities the senior group
would um would advise for the young in
heart and all of the senior activities
the senior lunch in and and have um
input in there the third one I know you
said a community advisory committee but
just Express to me what your thought is
related to that group that's the only
group and what would they what would
their focus be for the new individual
so the the question becomes is that the
the seniors will advocate for their own
programming and rightfully so um and the
rec commission will advocate for
recreational programs but there's a lot
of people that a aren't going to be part
of the rec programs and B are not
seniors and we're building this as a
senior and a community center so there
should be some kind of group that works
on
stuff related to a community center and
understands what a community center
should be doing as as functions as
opposed to a senior center or
specifically
Recreation so I mean those are my
recommendations you can you can ver that
any way You' like if if the recre
recreation committee let's just say this
if the recreation committee has has an
issue with the how the director
is U doing doing Recreation who's who's
the boss who's the chief you Recreation
director or the
committee who do you want to be the boss
in IDs in Ence we're we're the board of
directors and Eric is the CEO who has to
deal with them on a day-to-day basis
okay so just just those two let's say
because it's gonna come up oh it's gonna
come told you to do this and you're not
doing
this that happens every day though that
happens every day with a lot of
different who's the the chief those
two um I think if we wrote this up we
would write this up as that these groups
would advise the new director in in
these areas and it would only be an
advisory capacity um what they'll do as
residents is if they don't see their
needs being taken care of they're going
to complain and the first person they're
going to go to is not the director
they're going to go to Eric and then or
they're going to go to Yus Scott so
it's just the same pattern that we deal
with all the time the question is
they're advisory groups not Direct
Control groups and what they're advising
on
is my had specific things that mean
something to the people that are
participating in those committees um and
that one point is the is the director
going to need any more advice from these
three
boards I'm sure this board is going to
give that individual advice as well well
along long as I'm I'm I'm thinking that
right now it's there to help this new
director get on board yeah some point it
also gives them uh gives the director um
a group of committed hopefully committed
individuals that are willing to lend a
hand
because uh the new director is going to
need assistance from various groups
including
us so I I don't really have a problem
with it I think what we would want to do
is we would want to ask
um for volunteers potentially for those
committees and sit there and see how it
goes it's just a question of are we all
willing
to support
that anybody nobody yeah I I kind of had
this the same question that Scott did
just how long we thought that they would
be advising this person so that pretty
valid point you know forever I mean I I
don't think the seniors are gonna want
to give up say in what they do and
instead of having 40 seniors I'll go to
a
director and give them issues you have
one group of seniors that's empowered to
work with that person to come up with
what programming the seniors think are
appropriate I don't necessarily want a
director to tell the seniors what
programming they're going to get I want
a senior center director to work with
them to get the programs they want plus
some stuff I
want you
know I think we're gonna get we're gonna
probably get
questions it's good to have this
conversation because I'm just thinking
if I'm a Senior Transport ation
driver I want to know like what what is
my role or what things would I be
talking to this person about I think we
don't have to talk about this tonight
but just continue to
say this is what we we think this person
would give value to the new director I I
think that's what I'm kind of struggling
with is trying to understand because I'm
I'm not in the mix of this every day may
I mean maybe these people already have
an idea in mind of what they'll share
with
the director but that's just my thoughts
right now but I I think it's I think
it's great because you're
giving you're giving the director
insight for people that are already
doing it and and then the seniors can
input their thoughts into some of these
people like you said so it's not
multiple people going to the director so
I like the idea yeah and my goal in that
was to provide a wide off essentially of
senior issues and Senior programs you
got to put Kathy pazi on it because
she's been sitting in that role
essentially for a long time so if
anybody can advise somebody on what the
town has done up to this point it's her
so if she's willing to serve she would
be an obvious one um the young at heart
is probably the second biggest program
that we run um and so I would put Sue
Schmidt because Su Schmidt runs that
program currently well okay let's let's
back up this is not for us to sit there
and say who we would want on these
committees they all have to
submit you know a notice that they're
interested in the question for the board
is are we willing to establish these
three new committees to
assist the director of the community
side and if we are we just need to make
a motion to do it
okay if no one else is gonna I I'll make
a motion that we
establish um three committees to assist
and
advise the new Community Center Director
those three committees would be a a wre
committee a senior Advisory
Board and a community advisory
committee I will second that okay
further
discussion all those in favor I
I okay all right five nothing and so
Eric what I would request is that you um
uh publish these uh with Carol and uh
ask for potential um
members and uh obviously there's there's
some uh groups that you feel uh strongly
about and I please ask you to reach out
to those individuals and sit there and
see if they'd put their names in all
right sure anybody anybody else have any
other issues related to that I just have
one quick question
since uh the wreck commission already
exists and it's a fully formed board do
you want to ask again or what is it that
you want to do related to the wreck
commission well personally you can leave
that group Al uh as The Advisory Group
for that that's fine because they're
already in I mean unless anybody has a
issue I
mean you or myself or any Resident can
go to a Rec commission meeting and sit
there and tell them things that they
would like to be considered for the new
community center so and then that group
and the chairperson can go to the to the
uh
uh Community Center Director and tell
them what's up but so I I have no
problem with that I don't think you need
to okay for a new group there but the
other two you do
sure
okay um any other issues on that no okay
4 B cart Don
lunberg so in your packet you have both
a resignation from Mike Bazi and then uh
don Lundberg has
graciously uh agreed to take over the
cart program so my suggestion would be
that you appoint officially appoint Don
Lundberg as the Andover uh
representative for the cart or the
endover person running the cart
program uh somebody want to make that
motion
um I make that I make the motion to
accept Don lunberg as the new cart um
volunteer
seconded okay all those in favor I all
right five nothing thank you very
much okay um item five resignations uh
there was a resignation in the packet
from Mike plazy resigning from the cart
program which we just discussed again
I'd like to
just thank Mike for all his time and
everything that he's done for the
community related to uh this program and
everything else so thank you very much
for your your
time thank you
Mike right um item six town
administrative
report okay I'm gonna share my screen
here
okay let me make that
larger okay I'm just going to go over
the things that have changed or modified
since I put together the packet uh
number one July 4th we scheduled an
employee meeting in the town hall just
to go over the benefit information
changes and presumably we'll have a
budget so J June June 4th sorry you're
right June 4th um after that we're going
to have a cookout um we scheduled it
then because the following day the young
at heart program is having their cookout
and since we got to get the grill out
anyway we might as well grill out for
both so Board of Selectmen are certainly
invited to both meeting and the cookout
afterward if any of you could make it uh
that would be great
um I did submit for a congressional
appropriation through uh Senators Murphy
and blue Fall's office uh it would be
for approximately
$410,000 which would complete the
community center and also pay for the
installation of the backup generator
that would cover the fire department the
town hall and the community center so
we've done a lot of the background uh
electrical and conduit work to make that
happen because some of that had to go in
now while the community center was being
built
um it's a fairly large expensive project
putting the generator in so I'm hoping
to fund it
congressionally um that'll allow us to
stretch the money that we have put aside
for the community
center and get both the Community Center
completed as well as the backup
generator for the
complex uh I also submitted a grant
through the State Department of Aging um
they had some arpa funds that they
allotted to senior
centers um and proposed to use that
money to buy a lot of the equipment for
the
kitchen that way even before we have
time to do permanent installs at least
we'll have functional refrigerators
freezers you know and uh an ice maker
and microwave that kind of stuff um
however shortly after I submitted the
Grant I got a note from the Department
of Aging saying the governor is uh
considering canceling that program and
reusing the money elsewhere so it's
unclear whether they're going through
with that um frankly the reason why I
held off submitting it towards near the
end of the program cycle was because I
wanted the community center as far along
as we could get before we uh submitted
it so we knew better what we what we got
that may have been a mistake maybe I
should have submitted the thing you know
six months ago but um you know I was
well before the end of the program
deadline so I wasn't really worried
about it at the time um HVAC work is
ongoing at the Town Hall they should be
done by June 1 um the electrical work is
largely commute completed and the fire
department HVAC work is going to start
pretty quickly the propane tanks were
installed today they've left the
pressure test on them Thursday they
should come back and do final hookups
and put the regulator ERS in um I am
working to find an MEP which is an
engineer that specializes mechanical
electrical and plumbing
issues to give us a schematic and a
repair plan for the endover elementary
school Plumbing issues um I have been
touch with a bunch of the engineering
firms most of them have frankly told me
they're way too busy um to be even
considering about something if we want
to consider construction this summer I
did find one firm out of Hartford that
thinks they have enough bandwidth to get
it done reasonably uh called Aztec
Engineers um so they're going to be out
Thursday and hopefully uh we'll get a
proposal back from them on what it would
cost to to design the uh
updates okay so as far as I know and I
was trying to puru through all the uh
state laws that have cleared both the
House and Senate it does appear that
they passed a state law that allows
schools to keep 2% of their Surplus uh
if they're un under budget so this will
bypass the board of Finance um which has
always been the the agency which
determined whether they were allowed to
do that or not um there's a lot of other
legislation that may or may not get
signed by the governor still trying to
figure all that out some of it still up
in the air so that's uh it's been a kind
of a crazy legislative
session as far as Bunker Hill Bridge
goes uh next on May 29th we're going to
be doing interviews for the uh for the
inspection construction inspection
services so we invited four companies to
bid SLR WMC AI engineers and Michael
Baker
International uh the review panel is
myself Mark Burns representing the state
of
Connecticut uh two other uh Mark St
Germaine is a retired uh Connecticut do
engineer and Todd penny is the engineer
for the town of centry and Ed Sisley is
also on that panel so uh that was the
panel that I was able to get approved by
the state uh do um and they get final
approval of the panel since they're the
people that are actually paying for the
work um before you leave that because it
it involves Bunker Hill Road can you sit
there and ask uh Todd Penny um how the
potential Al gunin pipeline project will
impact that road because um I want to
make sure that if there there's
something that
is being built in that area that um it
doesn't impact traffic in the town of
Andover so I'd like to get as much
information on that as we possibly can
understood I mean where the pipeline
crosses Bunker Hill is still in the town
of Andover not in the town of
centry
um
so yeah what's this pipeline
project Jeff excuse me what's the
pipeline
project um there is a pipeline project
that um since I don't read the paper uh
I get all my news on the phone uh a nice
local resident I won't name names Diane
granier sent us a a newspaper article on
it um and she sent it to us today so it
is I don't I what I went online to look
for some more information it's not
saying as to what type of project it
doesn't appear to be the type of project
that was proposed in Ando
but we just don't have enough
information so my concern is that that
project which is scheduled got
potentially for um Bunker Hill Road and
what was the other cross feeder
Eric uh hop River Road hop River Road
that that property is fairly close to
Andover and
um while I obviously have a problem with
the expansion and we all did in town of
VOR have problem with the expansion of
the pipeline and the work my concern my
biggest concern is traffic and if their
plan is to put something in that area
and they expect to drive a significant
amount of trucks down Bunker Hill Road I
have a problem
so anyway let's find out more
information it's on the agenda it's it's
not on the agenda but it's it's it's got
to be on our minds because we don't want
it to negatively impact
Handover understood um uh so we still
have about 12 a half thousand left in
the original uh do connectivity Grant um
if we do approve the ebike loner program
I would plan on spending a portion of
that on that project um if not you know
we should probably start thinking about
what else we should uh what we could
consider getting for the ball fields or
potentially the jump start equipment for
the
playground um so just to be thinking
about that um the second thing is Public
Works installed the new pet waste
dispensers that you had asked for a
while back at the uh Veterans Memorial
Field um and they also put up the
additional signage uh and then as Jay
was driving away after just putting up
the signage he sent me a couple photos
of a resident who showed up right after
that and was walking uh playing with his
German Shepherd on the middle of the
field which is what we said before is
that you can put up all the signage you
want so my intention is to uh send those
pictures on to the resident State
tropper and I I don't think uh since I
don't believe we actually have an
ordinance that prohibits it um he can go
talk to the individual but I don't know
what else he could really do I mean you
can't arrest him I don't think um so
that's where we're at with
that uh can we pass a minor or ordinance
on that
yes then let's for the next meeting
let's put that on the
agenda I don't think you can p
well we just passed the ability fine
that wouldn't be a minor
ordinance and if there's no fine what's
your enforcement mechanism okay so we
can't we have to have a major ordinance
to place a fine and we got to go to town
meeting correct okay perfect all
right keep
going uh and that's basically all I have
for my report unless you have questions
for me what's the chance of getting the
$410,000
from I think actually it's reasonably
good because it's a request that's right
in the middle of one it's we're not
asking for a lot of money compared to
most of the requests that come through
that program it's actually a very modest
request um through that particular uh
agency and two because we haven't ever
really applied for any sort of
congressional funding before um they're
more likely to give it to us than
somebody else and three it was actually
a pretty well written proposal so I
think we stand a reasonably good chance
of doing it but it also depends on how
the legislative sessions go
overall um as most of you know they this
should be something that goes through in
September or October but this year they
didn't make their minds up on anything
until April so um there's a significant
chance the way Congress has been working
lately that any funding rest request
would be
delayed um but it's also the first time
I've tried for this type of funding so
so I think we have a reasonable chance
but but I don't
know anybody have any additional
questions for
Eric and and actually part of the reason
why I wanted to go that route is because
one of our concerns is that because we
just built the community center anything
we do now in terms of major construction
activities is going to trip over into
prevailing wage but if it's a
congressional
appropriation we're required to use
prevailing wage anyway so this is all
bid at prevailing you know all the bid
numbers are at prevailing wage so I
don't care whether it's a prevailing
wage job because it's Federal money that
that would be spent on
um so that's kind of one of the reasons
why I pursued that route
um you
know okay any other questions for
Eric okay all right Eric thank you very
much y um item seven a discussion with
the assessor John chaponis um regarding
information that we've seen the last few
months so uh I know John is on the
meeting or was on the meeting
is he on the meeting there he is there
we go my computer locked up for a second
okay all right John thank you for
joining us um
certainly over the last couple months
Eric has been providing us some
information that we requested regarding
um property taxes for structures and
then property taxes for personal
property or the tax the assessment for
the personal property taxes and then
also we requested last month the a
summary of the top 20 taxpayers for
Motor Vehicles by Resident if all
possible we did not get that in our
package but that's something we'd like
to get but um and that's that is totally
my fault I did not pass that on to John
for that I apologize no problem we we
can I mean listen um I said this at one
of the last meetings this is the John's
John's role and the assessor role is
very important in that it generates all
of our tax
funding but we as a board need to do a
little bit better job of understanding
how that base goes up and down and how
the work is done because John's role is
very difficult to evaluate and you know
one of my first questions to you John is
how do other communities evaluate the
work of the
assessors I'm not sure I understand the
question you're
asking okay so everybody who sits there
and does a job and especially when it's
a complicated job like yours there has
to be some way to evaluate the work
being done so I'm asking you do other
communities because I know Andover
doesn't do it does do other communities
how do they evaluate the work being done
by their assessor's
office I mean I don't think they treat
this office different than any other
office I mean you know in my fulltime
town we have a meeting once a year where
you get evaluated but you're getting
evaluated on you know if you show up for
work on time and if you're not using too
much sick time and if if you're treating
people with
respect um I mean those are the kind of
things we get evaluated on everything
else when like when it comes to real
estate appraisal that's an opinion of
value so you're not getting you're not
getting evaluated
on the appraised value that you set on a
property if that's your
question so BAS basically the mechanisms
that the assessor office in every
Community uses
um the part of it is is not you know you
know in my field it's you add and
subtract and you sit there and you do it
and Jeff Murray's field it's engineering
there's certain rules that are followed
my question is how do we as a community
especially a volunteer board try to
understand how you go at and how your
assessor's office goes at and calculates
out different things and and John what
I'm getting is you're going to tell me
that's not possible but um I really do
want to get down to understanding it
better because I've been involved in a
in town for a while and um I still don't
exactly understand how the calculations
are done and where you go but I'll even
skip that for right now my question on
the property owners that are available
to us for all the
properties how does the assessed value
on any um rental property work so
someone like Dollar General or I mean
they may own that property outright but
like the Kings Kingsley Drive apartments
that that location is making is charging
rent on a number of units how does how
does the assessed
value uh change based upon any rental
income
collected okay so I'll back up to your
first question before I answer the
second one there are some benchmarks in
regards to what you just said for
example when we do a townwide
reevaluation it has to be uh meet the
performance-based revaluation standards
with the state of Connecticut um also I
mean there are certain things like state
reports that have to be filed timely or
or there are penalties that get assessed
against the town so there are some
things like that I guess they just don't
pop to to the top of my mind when when
you hit me with the question for the
first time um in regards to how property
is appraised there's three different
methods there's the uh sales comparison
approach there's the cost approach and
there's the income approach the uh sales
comparison approach and cost approach
can be used on uh any kind of property
the income approach is typically
reserved for that of a a commercial
property with the thought process being
that nobody buys a 30 unit apartment
building to live in it essentially what
they're buying is the income stream
they're they're buying the right to
collect you know
$20,000 a month in in rent or whatever
you know the rent may
be what's also important is the expenses
because you could have two different
apartment buildings that are both 30
units and one the owner could provide
heat and hot water to all of them and
the second one could have individual
units where they get their own bill so
it's not just the gross rent that comes
into play it's it's what we call Net
operating income it's the gross income
and then subtract all the expenses and
what are you actually left with and then
that goes into a um a real estate
formula called the income capitalization
approach to Value which is based on a uh
anticipated return on investment so you
know the investor is expecting a certain
percent return on their money over the
holding period and all those uh all
those consideration go into the
capitalization
approach so sales cost and income so a
property such as the Kingsley apartment
you might take all three of those into
account and then determine the value
that you you come up with to determine
the total taxes paid you you wouldn't
use the sales approach because you don't
have enough sales in town and the cost
appro approach is certainly the the
least reliable unless you're dealing
with something that's really really
fairly new and
um a good example of something for the
cost approach would be like a hospital
something that that doesn't sell and
doesn't rent and um you know might be uh
a newer it's probably the least of the
three approaches that get utilized in
and over with our commercial property we
predominantly uh used income
approach okay
and just so we as a board understand
that income approach um you send
out forms to all of those types of
properties and they complete them um
from a standpoint of a similar to a tax
return where it's it's a independent or
self-reporting
all commercial property owners are
required to file the income and expense
statement in the state of iate annually
they have to file it by May 1st or
there's a 10% assessment penalty that
gets applied we get a very
um successful return on the on the I
that we send out in endover versus
larger communities tend to get a worse
return the city of Harford gets about
75% compliance meaning they have 25% of
the people who are willing to eat a 10%
penalty rather than divulge the data if
they divulge false data then they get
the 10% penalty
anyway okay and and how many of those do
we have in town I can't answer that
question off the top of my head I mean
I'd have to go back and look but it's a
small number because Andover is a small
town with a very small commercial base
yeah and and when you say commercial
based just so we all understand that
includes the apartment complexes in town
or Does it
include um I think we only have two
apartment complexes in to yeah you get
that
yeah okay all right and then so we'll
we'll sit there and we'll come back to
that and thank you very much for coming
because it's always helpful to hear it
from you so we can understand what we're
dealing with um when you move down to
the property taxes uh personal property
taxes can you just explain to us uh how
those reports are filed when they're
filed and then the work that's done on
the um I'm sorry let me go back one step
first permits how are permits evaluated
on all those properties
like what work does your office do when
someone files a permit on any property
within Town sure so we get a copy of
every permit um in town and uh we put
them in map and lot order and I go out
and and take a look at uh every single
property we get permits for solar and
solar isn't tax but I still drive by and
take a look at the property sometimes
you get a permit for electrical and you
get out there and there's a pool and a
deck and and a bunch of stuff but the
electrician pulled the permit for the
ground fall so you never really know
what you're going to get sometimes we
get a permit for a roof and typically a
roof by itself isn't something that I
would increase the assessment on but
when you get to the property you find
out they did a new roof siding shutters
gutters Windows Doors you know the
garage doors the works and you're seeing
a lot of properties getting that
facelift these days um so if they do a
multitude of those items you're talking
about 40,000 $50,000 sometimes maybe
more depending on the size of the house
so we do go out at every permit and um
you know if I'm going to be on the
street anyway and they're map and lot
order it only takes a few more seconds
to drive by a house that added solar and
see that you know it looks the same and
it doesn't look like anything else was
added so I do um drive by and look at
those as
well right thank you it's not the only
you know Source we use for discover list
and value um you know the uh definition
of my role is the fair administration of
the local property tax and and the
easiest way to make it fair is to
discover list and value everything
that's taxable and make sure you're not
omitting anyone so another thing that we
do is we look at realtor.com once a week
and um I used to do it once a month you
can't anymore because they get listed on
Thursday and they're under last best
offers by Sunday these days so um you
know when people put something up on
realtor.com that's the only time they
don't come in and tell me that there's
cracks in the base
and you know everything that's wrong
this is when they're telling you
everything that they've remodeled
everything that's been replaced and um
they're boasting about you know the the
the finer attributes of of the property
so we look at TH those and we compare
them with our own data to see if there's
any work that was done without
Hermits and and if you're you're looking
at that information and you're looking
at sales data do you automatically
increase the assessment if the sales
pric is above your assessed value no so
the law on the state of Connecticut says
that you have to appraise every property
as of the same date and that date has to
be the date of your last townwide
revaluation so our last townwide reval
was for October 1st
2021 so let's say there was a a brand
new street with a bunch of new houses
and they were all identical and they
were all selling for 450,000 on October
1st of 21 and now this year they built
two more and they sold for 650 we still
would value them at
450,000 because the the thought process
is if you value everyone as of the same
date taxation will be fair it wouldn't
be fair if we were to crank those other
the two new ones up to 650 and everybody
else stayed at
450 okay but in the next revalue that
that 650 would then become the potential
value for all the remaining houses in
that complex it would but I mean you
know it's a sliding scale if your grand
list goes up 20% you know your Mill
rate's coming down 20% you it's a
fallacy that a lot of people think we
make money off rebound we meaning the
town get additional tax dollars we do
not I try to give an example of it's
more like everybody in town went out to
dinner and the check came and we we
divvy it up over you know who who pays
what portion of it you really shift
around who pays what at our last
rebal some properties on Andover Lake
had tax bills that may may have doubled
I mean um they went way up because the
sales on the lake were going way up and
and that wasn't true in the rest of of
town the rest of the Town might have
went up 10 or 15% but the lake went up
um sub substantially so that's what
revaluation is designed to do it it's
designed to in Connecticut we tax people
at vorum which is Latin for according to
value and because value changes over
time they picked five years as the time
frame in which every years we'll take a
new look and we'll revalue everyone and
and some people will go up and some
people will go down at reval we actually
have people whose tax bills go down
after
revaluation
yeah um when you're dealing with
personal property taxes um I know we got
I was on that for a second but I went
back to the other thing on permits um
can you explain to us how personal
property taxes work in town so we can
understand the mechanism and then let's
walk through a couple things
certainly so I think everybody knows
that we tax real estate and that we tax
Motor Vehicles personal property is kind
of the one thing that gets forgotten
because it it doesn't typically ever
touch the average residential homeowner
um businesses in Connecticut have to
file a personal property declaration and
pay tax on the equipment that they own
so something that you or I might own
like a lawn mower and a leaf blower and
a weed whacker wouldn't be taxed but the
minute you know I open John's
Landscaping um you know and I start
doing it as a business those items
become taxable uh same for household
Furniture you know it's exempt in in a
residence but it's taxable when it's you
know used by a business so they have to
file a declaration once every year it's
called the personal property declaration
or state form M15 and they file that in
our office and um they declare
everything that they have and it's it's
a cost times
depreciation excuse me mechanism that
values it so it's basically if you
bought it this year it's 95% last year
90 three years ago 80 70 60 and it goes
down to a 30% residual if it's EDP
electronic data processing equipment
like computers or printers um it has an
accelerated depreciation table because
that the the used value on that stuff
falls off the shelf quickly so that goes
86 60 40 down to a 20% residual after
four years so first the first the values
depreciate then you add them all up and
you take 70% for Taxation and that's if
um you know there's no exemptions that
uh were applicable because the state of
Connecticut is is constantly passing
more and more um exemptions and sort of
having carve outs for uh specific things
that we can't ta we can no longer tax
okay so if we sat there and and looked
at two two that are at the bottom of
this list the 7-Eleven which is the gas
station that's on Route
Six so just for everybody's
understanding that
$999,000 is the current depreciated
value of all the
internal and external items that is
needed to run that
business so you're looking at 7-Eleven
yep and you have what
99290 yes yeah I need glasses it's so
fine to read it so first thing we would
do is um 99 to Eric could you share that
please sure it's in the packet on page
13 I know yeah so the first thing you
would do is equalize it so if you take
that number and you divide by S or 70%
it inflates it to the uh 100% value
which is basically 140 42,000 141
843 that's the 100% depreciated value so
if everything they owned was seven years
old or older it would be about a half a
million dollars worth of property so
unless you know the exact ages of all
the different you know
items um it's uh it's difficult to put
to sit here and say exactly what they
have for a grand total no understanding
just just trying to get uh everybody to
understand how it works so the pumps
that are utilized to pump gas are they
considered personal
property yes okay are the coolers that
are in the facility considered personal
property that's part of the real estate
the coolers the built-ins yeah if they
have a freestanding one that's standing
in the corner sure but the ones that are
built into the walls that you can load
from the back as part of the real estate
okay
all right
um but the pumps would be
considered personal property okay would
and so how so so your office takes the
the returns that are completed by the
taxpayer evaluates them um how many
audits do you perform just so we
understand just mentally any no
assessor's office I know of except for
two that employ um an auditor actually
do their own in-house audits in
Colchester um we hire out a firm that
does them and we spent
$5,000 doing audits last year on five
properties and it brought in
$36,000 in
Revenue brought in about 15,000 a year
um but uh we go back we do a look back
for three years
all right and then so anything along the
lines of manufacturing within the
community there's manufacturing
exemptions that are provided to
them that's one of the um many
exemptions that have been passed in the
last few years and a lot of them when
they're
passed
um you know they start out with State
reimbursement so when the manufacturing
machinery and equipment exemption was
first created
might have been about 12 or 14 years
ago it was only for 5 years and the
state would reimburse the municipality
and I used to file a a state report with
a claim and I used to get
reimbursement
um let's see I'm going to say it was
about 2007 or 2008 when the state really
started struggling with their budgets
and you know they weren't even making
their pension payments and they started
cutting Aid to municipalities everywhere
and they eliminated the reimbursement on
uh mm and Manufacturing machinery and
equipment um I it was really bad for
towns like East Hartford and Stratford
with Pratt and sakori aircraft they lost
like six and eight million dollars a
year in in reimbursement it's not that
bad in and over but still it is a
revenue loss um we have other exemptions
they've eliminated too uh the elderly uh
uh lowincome elderly tax Ben benefit or
some people call it circuit breaker we
used to get reimbursed for that they
eliminated it veterans exemptions they
eliminated the reimbursement on and even
now you know with um a general fund
balance or they like to call it the
rainy day fund in the state of
Connecticut it's up to 3.9 billion up
from 3.3 billion last year it's the
highest it's ever been in the state of
Connecticut you would think they would
reinstitute the funding on some of these
programs that they created that were
their program
and they were supposed to pay for but um
that has not happened last year they
threw $100 million at Motor Vehicle tax
relief but it only went to towns who had
a mill rate in excess of uh 32 and $32
and 46 cents it's it's weird that they
picked that number but they picked that
number because that's how high they
could go and spend exactly $100
million so we didn't see any of the
motor mot vehicle uh relief
money okay and then um I know we don't
have the motor vehicle information but
just so you can explain to everybody the
motor vehicle Motor Vehicles how our
Motor Vehicles are taxed within the town
or assessed I'm
sorry sure so whereas real estate is
based on uh fair market value as of a
given date Motor Vehicles are not it
would be impossible for us to actually
appraise motor vehicle
uh for starters we're not used car
salespeople and you know everybody has
their car at work when when when we're
available to look at them during the day
uh so they're not taxed on you know
their condition their mileage and all
those factors they're taxed on 100% of
the clean retail value out of the NADA
book and then we take that value and we
multiply times 70% for an assessment so
if the clean retail is 20 grand we're
going to assess it at 14,000 and
honestly I mean sometimes that vehicle
assessed at 14,000 is only worth 125 I
mean or even less the older the car gets
the further it the further it gets away
from being anywhere near a fair market
value but once again it's not designed
to be a fair market value I try to
explain it as a use Texs you know it's
just it it's the mechanism that they've
chosen and they would have the same
assessment on and each car all of us
would in any town in the state of
Connecticut we're not doing anything
differently here the pretty much
everything I've said tonight is how it's
done Statewide across the board now
there's a law that passed two years ago
and it goes into effect this October 1
and it says that commercial vehicles
will no longer be taxed the way they
were in the past that commercial
property owners would have to report
those Motor Vehicles on their personal
property declaration and give their
actual cost of of what they paid for for
the motor vehicle um they actually tried
to uh
chain strip that out this year um and
last year and both both attempts failed
it actually passed the house this year
and in the Senate I'm not kidding the
very last night the 11th Hour it might
have been 78 n o'clock somebody put an
amendment on it and they passed it in
the Senate with an amendment so it was
something different than what was passed
in the house they tried to send it back
to the house and pass it with an
amendment and that didn't happen so
right now we're still going forward
under the premise that that would be the
law this year we change the way
commercial Motor Vehicles are taxed and
um I was in a meeting today uh that was
about an hour and a half and and it had
people from Harford including three
members from the governor's office it
was on zoom and we talked about this
long and hard because I'm not sure we're
actually ready to implement this our
software vendors are not prepared for
this but as of right now that's the
direction we're
heading all right
so can I can I ask y so could you go
over the cell towers and and I see like
AT&T and T-Mobile are those the ones
that have the arrays on the on the cell
towers so there's couple different
components with cell tower
taxation the first one is the real
estate um let's say that uh you know
there's two houses side by side and one
of them gets a cell tower built in the
backyard because the land buts Route Six
and it's kind of up on a hill and it's a
great spot and they wanted to put a cell
tower there even though it's a
residential property we're going to go
back and we're going to we're going to
increase the value of that real estate
because they have a 20year land lease
with the cell tower company and they're
cre they're collecting somewhere between
12 and 1,800 bucks a month sometimes
even more than that if it's a really hot
location and and um you know if you were
looking at those two uh houses Scott you
know maybe you wouldn't want to sell
Tower in the backyard but um you know if
you knew they were going to pay 1,800
bucks a month you might say I'd rather
take that house and I'd be willing to
pay more it usually equates to about $10
to $200,000 more that we appraised the
real estate for just for having the land
leased for the pad that's the real
estate owner rarely do the cell towers
own the real estate so there's first
that component the second component is
the the tower itself which believe it or
not those monopoles are not all that
expensive and um that personal property
can be taxed one of two ways they can
either a reported on the personal
property declaration to the municipality
or they're allowed to report it to the
state of Connecticut and pay on a $41
mill rate and then the town gets
reimbursed when they pay at the state of
Connecticut they they they use a much f
depreciation table and excuse me that is
also like EDP electronic data processing
computerized equipment that um
depreciates quite quickly and gets
replaced quite quickly so those are the
the two different ways of cell tower
will will get taxed there's the land and
then there's the personal property
itself but all correct me if I'm wrong
but you have both like friend inst crown
castle owns the tower and then each
particular company like AT&T whatever
owns their own transmitters correct and
those are taxed separately they are but
they're they're not you know this isn't
million dollars worth of equipment it's
not as expensive as you might think and
and with when four or five different
people sign on to a tower that's when
the landowner gets more and more that's
why I said they could be getting
anywhere from 1,200 to 1,800 00 or or or
even two grand or 2200 depending on how
many people put an antenna on the
tower um my experience is the majority
of the time the guy who owns the tower
the pole itself is not one of those
companies he he owns that pole and he
offers it out for Verizon and um
T-Mobile and those companies to drop one
of their antennas on them and sometimes
you'll next time you look at a tower
look you might see one at one level
where it's like coming off here and then
there's another one here and another one
a little bit higher those are the
different antennas and and they're at
different altitudes on
purpose so crown castle is the owner of
the
pole uh who's Crown crown castle I
honestly don't oh okay yes it says right
there in the notes cell tower so they
might own I'd have to pull the
Declaration to look at exactly what they
have I don't who put the notes there
because I didn't do
that I put the notes there after talking
to Berta okay and then there's a cellco
partnership says cell phone tower also
that one I know for a fact is a tower
company but you know all our towers are
over they're over seven years old
they're fully depreciated they're
probably down to 20% Then times 70% for
taxation that's why it's so
low and but they're not as expensive
right out of the gate as you might think
you'd be
surprised but um but if that was the
case then don't you go on to the income
formula to sit there and see yeah change
change how you tax them then I I mean
listen we're just trying to understand
this so we'll we'll Circle back to this
because I don't want to over I don't
want to K this well before we Circle
away let's be clear that you can't use
the income approach on personal property
when we talked about the income approach
we were talking about real estate and
everything that we do is strictly
governed by State Statute so all I can
do is what the law allows for okay but
they also on the cell towers they're
also updating all of their equipment you
know all the time to make it a better
and I mean they don't leave it and be
stagnant they sit there and update like
Eric wants to do with all our truck Le
you know might be a different analogy
but they're going to change every five
years so they're really going to a
higher level of dollars related to this
new equipment that they bring in and
that's only if they tell you okay so I
when it comes to National tenants my
experience in being in this business
they they're usually 100% spoton And A
lot of times they have a firm that's
filing it for them they absolutely do
upgrade their equipment Jeff and it's
probably every four to five years when I
said Tower I meant the tower I didn't
mean the antennas the tower is just an
aluminum pole and those are all more
than 10 years old so you have the tower
company as number one then you have the
different cell companies and then you
have the land owner underneath we
actually do use the income approach on
the income that's given to the land
owner that's how we end up adding
anywhere from 180 to
$250,000 to the value of the real estate
so trust me if it's out there I'm taxing
it all right did anyone else have any
questions for John before we let him
go John thank you very much for coming
um it's something that we probably need
to do more often because we all need to
be better educated as to how um we're
taxing the community and understanding
how it's working and sit there and see
if there's anything that we're
identifying out there that's a little
different and Eric if you can for the
next meeting please please obtain the um
the highest paying motor vehicle
residences so we can understand that or
businesses because I'm more interested
in the businesses than I really am the
residents but it would help I mean this
information is great for us to get a
better understanding of of who's getting
taxt what within the community so thank
you John John thank you very much have a
good evening thanks John okay all right
um we're gonna move on to item eight old
business um 8A uh the Joshua trust
discussion
um um I'll start this one I spoke to
um I'm sorry I forgot John's last name
Eric H John henen from Josh trust today
and um uh I spoke to him about the the
different options related to the
properties and uh um I talked to
him specifically about the fact that
because there was so much opposition and
I know there's a lot of people that are
in favor of the potential Trail but
because there's so much opposition at
this point in time and
because uh the flip-flopping back and
forth between where it goes and what
parking lot to use and not use uh I told
him that um I didn't think that it would
pass so unless someone from this board
wants to make a motion to sit there and
vote on it I would like to move
on okay uh hearing none we'll move on to
item
8B Community Center construction
update okay so uh the community center
construction is going pretty well
overall um we have had to go back and
revise some of the engineering sketches
for the sidewalk locations because we
ran into a couple things uh one literal
one figurative the literal one being the
pathway uh connected to the town hall
right at a column um and since most
people are not capable of going through
a column we had to redesign it so that
the pathway went around the column um
the second thing so I think the plan
that we had and I sent to you uh
depicted the new location of the pathway
I could certainly share my screen if you
wanted to uh
discuss that portion of
it um and then we're getting fairly
close to uh the the end of the contract
with Leading Edge they seem to think
they're two to three weeks out from
having uh a turnover to the town hall
there's obviously quite a few things on
the punch list that still has to be done
but um they have time frames for most of
those things at this point so that's my
uh take on it I'm happy to share my
screen with the the image I gave you or
entertain questions or uh or whatever um
before we get started uh thank you for
the information that you sent but I
would recommend that you get back with
all of the committee members in
including all of the committee members
on that information and make sure that
that they are um
uh in sync with what your changes are
and what you're doing so that's what I I
would ask I mean I um uh I saw the
information this this morning and I uh I
think it'd be appropriate for you to
share that with Adrian Scott I know
Scott seen it but any of the other
members of the
community that were involved in that
committee uh it would be beneficial to
get their input rather than my personal
input so um just letting you know that
okay are you at asking for a delay in
construction because I mean we're we're
talking about pouring those sidewalks
probably in the next couple of days okay
so Scott is arle aison from the board of
Selectmen are you okay with where those
sidewalks are
G yeah I
was I was there when we were discussing
the location of those sidewalks wasn't I
here all right and then and then the the
the retaining wall being removed are you
okay with that Scott yes I am sir okay
so I still would tell you Eric before
you know if those
theall sidewalk in the back it there
not on the
print there's a couple other did did you
read my
email I I did and when when I sent that
to you what I said was that was meant to
depict the location of just the front
sidewalk and the reason that was done
was because our town engineer didn't use
the latest print when
uh you know when he added the new
sidewalk locations in grades so we don't
actually have a map that shows all of
the things that have changed in the past
plus the front so this was only meant to
to give the contractor guideline
elevations for putting that front
sidewalk in that alone um that's kind of
why I passed this on to you and I I said
that to you guys at the time that that's
what that depicted
um so yes there's there's a sidewalk in
the back that's not represented on that
the location of one of the basins and
cleanouts is not located on that there's
a bunch of things that aren't indicated
on on that uh that
print okay he didn't have time is that
what
happened he started with an an old
print well part of the reason he started
with an over older print Scott is once
we went back to the final print in the
in what we presented to the boards
showed the wall in place
so but when we took out the retaining
wall because we frankly didn't have the
money to afford the retaining wall um
and we eliminated the patio again for
the same reason they went back to the
last design that had grading in Contours
showing no retaining wall there and he
started with that one and that was
before we had made all the changes to
where the rear uh sidewalks went and uh
some of the drainage structure so that
that was just that addition was just to
show grading in and around where the
sidewalks were um so we had accurate
numbers for the contractor that's what
that picture was meant
for
okay
um well if Scott is good with it I'm
good with it so Scott if you're good
with
it good okay so Eric please don't put
construction on hold please don't do
that yeah don't insinuate that no but I
mean if you were going to tell me that I
had to get that approved before the
sidewalks go in that's what I would have
had to do um I thought that decision had
already been made but um that's okay but
um uh Eric if if Scott is good u i as a
member of the board are good and I would
hope the other members of the board are
good so anybody have any
issues okay uh the fit out of the
building Eric in your uh in the package
you you listed what your intentions were
I don't I personally don't have any
problems with it I'm sure there's going
to be lots of things that we need to sit
there and add to this um the question is
anyone going to have any problems if uh
we use contingency to to do this to some
at some level not 100% but some level if
Eric needs it
[Music]
anybody no okay so then Eric continue to
to go through and do what you're doing
and
uh uh just don't put us uh in U
Financial Jeopardy so and I know you
won't so I won't put you in financial
Jeopardy um
so go the qu the fit out of the kitchen
any additions is going to be added to
the overall cost isn't
it not if
we what we would do with the kitchen
Scott right now is we would buy the
equipment and because the uh for
instance the uh ice maker is technically
on Wheels the uh refrigerator is movable
the the the freezer is movable those are
not built in so we can get away with
purchasing them without having to sweat
um it's just an expense it's not so we
can do that without sweating prevailing
wage over that so the only things I
think where we're starting to uh get
into a concern would be the Audi visual
stuff um you know because we saw thatt
and I thought that we we couldn't add
that well but the other thing is that as
long as our own guys are installing it
and we're just buying the equipment I
think we're going to be okay with that
um well how do we find out that you're
certain I think makes me
concerned well let's evaluate we don't
have to have this conversation in our
meeting Eric please please look at it
and make sure that you're good with what
we're doing but the way that you broke
it out in your list of how you wanted to
attack it I was fine with it there's
just a financial component that we're
all concerned about so what about the
floor in the kitchen yeah yeah what what
about
it what are we gonna still put the epoxy
in there yes
yes okay yeah I would have stripped it
out if we absolutely had had to but at
this point there's no reason
to um I mean if Leading Edge is willing
to sit there and tell us they have two
to four weeks left you got to be really
close they they know what's coming right
there's no big
surprises hopefully we're we're down to
the very end and we understand exactly
what we're dealing with and um all of
the items that Eric has laid out will
end up getting done in an appropriate
timeline
okay okay um is there anything on that
list that you're not comfortable with
purchasing presuming it's not going to
get us in hot water with prevailing
wage that's that's my question for you
is there anything in that fit out that
you're uncomfortable with or you don't
want to spend
on how tight is it right now if you're
going to buy the audio visual equipment
and before you weren't going to
well right now we got about a
$115,000 pusher
y okay so can we wait until Leading Edge
is done and then you'll really know what
you
got we can the the only issue and I do
understand you want it outfitted so that
July 1 when we have a new person there
they're ready to go leading edges is
going to turn it over to June 1st or
June
15th somewhere between those two dates
is my
guess okay but we're wired for all this
stuff
correct we are okay so I wouldn't sweat
it I mean I would just wait till the
building's completely done and then just
buy the
equipment
okay um let me I I don't I'd be
interested in helping with that actually
because I'm kind of a
technical um home home theater
so yeah you know what Jee you and I
haven't talked yet but Eric was Eric and
I were talking some about some speakers
and stuff and I said you were the better
I could be on those conversations but I
felt like you were the better person to
kind of lead that so yeah let's just get
together have a meeting and we can
decide what our requirements are and I
can probably go out and find us some
pretty good pricing on some equipment
right and if you saw in my email that's
exactly what I said I was hoping the two
of you would give me a fit out list for
that because that a my my cup of tea
let's just get to the Finish Line first
and then we'll work on it maybe I can
meet with you maybe in a week or two we
can go over the room and stuff and see
what the the wish list
is
okay all right any other questions
related to the community
center all right Eric thank you um 8 C
discussion of blight and level
involvement
is there anything specific that anybody
wants to talk about Eric are there any
issues that are out there that are new
to the
situations uh not new directly related
to
blight okay um I have a question if I
could uh about the um Barnett property
you talked about that I I was told that
the Barnet property was up to snow
everything is fine out
there uh I certainly don't believe
so um I've made it clear to the zoning
agent that he needs to keep working on
that owner and uh a get him to pay the
lean that we have against his property
and B keep cleaning all the the junk
that he has accumulated on his
property so it isn't finished then
no no as far as I'm concerned it's
slightly
better um but he still has a couple
dozen tractor trailers worth of crap to
take out of there okay um Scott if you
can Circle back with Eric on any
specific property questions that you
have you can report about it next month
y um 8D The ebike Loner program so um
just from from my standpoint on this uh
and Eric I'll ask you this question to
begin with um if I understood the
initial part of this program there was a
grant just for the bikes is that
accurate correct we got a grant to
purchase the bikes and then we got a
little Grant from the health department
for the supporting
equipment um and then we'd spend some of
the money out of our old connectivity
Grant fund to purchase the bike
Walkers okay but from from my what I
understood is that there were grants to
assist with the potential purchase of
the
bikes correct okay all
right okay
um all right we'll we'll have we we we
need to have a discussion on on this
program so I know at our last meeting uh
we discussed uh kerma and kerma giving a
blessing on a potential ebike program
and in your information I am assuming
that you got kerma to give blessing on
the type of program that we're we're
discussing with a corresponding waiver
for anyone that
utilizes one of the
bikes correct and subsequent to that at
about
6:30 uh their attorney emailed me a
revised waiver form uh that meets their
language which I'm happy to share I I
can't say that I've even fully reviewed
it yet I I don't think I don't think we
need to see it right now we need to talk
about the
overarching issues related to the
potential
program but just so I understand at our
last meeting the way I understood it was
there was a grant avail able our request
was to sit there and determine if kerma
would ensure the program and minimize
the town's liability and is the answer
is yes with appropriate waivers to be
filed or signed by users correct they
were happy with the design the overall
design of the program and what we were
trying to accomplish okay so now we'll
just talk about individual opinions on
type of program um from my perspective
uh I think it's just an opportunity for
the town to expand its offerings I don't
necessarily look at it as a a negative I
I always look at if the insurance
company is is going to sit there and and
allow us to be covered and and and this
doesn't have to do with whether somebody
gets hurt or not get hurt that's not
what I'm after I'm I'm looking at it
going the the insurance company
understands the
program understands the the equipment
that we're talking about and hopefully
it it is ebike specific
um if it's Grant funded and it doesn't
cost the town any money um I'm in favor
of
it so and I and I know everybody else
can have their opinion on it um but if
it doesn't cost us money
and even if it had to be shut down the
town now has assets that it can be
utilized
so that didn't cost the residents any
money go ahead anybody else want to talk
about
this well you know my concerns and it's
not that that we're going to be insured
it's just that you know it's it's a
liability I
mean these people are going to be using
these bikes they're going to be
operating speeds way above their Fitness
that they could pedal on a normal
bicycle and I've really got concerns
over this and um you're going to put
Nava cyclist I mean I've been riding for
30 years on the road and I have a lot of
experience and I wouldn't put my wife
out there on any bike and traffic in
today's roads with the speeds that
things are going so um that it's just we
don't we just don't have a full-time
person I you know I brought the concerns
up about if we get a flat tire or
mechanical on the bike and you will get
flat tires you will run over screws and
stuff in the road and you will get flats
and and and Eric says you could just
pedal these things back well these bikes
are about 80 pounds and you're not going
to be able to Pedal this thing back when
you're talking to somebody in limited
shape so you know between you know just
liability wise if somebody who seriously
gets hurt or killed it's not if we're
going to get sued it's going to be when
we're going to get sued and I don't want
to put the residents to that type of
liability I mean I I always said I'm a
cyclist
but I just don't think the town has a
place doing this to be honest with you
especially ebikes it was regular bikes
it'd be a whole different story but I
mean these are these things are capable
of traveling 20 miles an hour uphill on
Flats with people that could probably
with their Fitness
pedal 8 to 10 miles an hour and they're
not they don't have the skills or you
know knowledge to handle a bike at that
speed around corners through stop signs
I mean I raced a bunch of years and and
I have pretty decent handling skills and
I've had to do some pretty evasive
maneuvers by you know cars cutting off
in front and other things so I mean
that's just my opinion um like I said I
I'm cyclist I support cycling but from a
toal's perspective it's just I just
don't think it's a good idea with the
stabbing levels we
have iove and also I just want to add
one more thing this grant program they
also it's not just bicycles they'll buy
helmets safety vests all kinds of other
things so if we decided we weren't going
to do this program we could probably
provide every uh child under 16 even
adults with free helmets in the whole
town if we chose to go that route
instead so um that's just another
option Scott I I rode some ebikes about
a week ago me and my wife rode them I
was very surprised at how fast they
were how fast you could get them going
was amazing I was amazed new
technology and
and you know I'm I think that I'm a I
have a bicycle of my own I I just know
that they're very fast I don't
have um if the if the waiver is good
enough for the I mean I don't have a
problem with anything but liability the
only problem I
have uh did you sign a waiver no I
didn't did you just go to a bike store
and and test drive oh friends friends
friends I gota okay
um well I think all of us are in the
same page it's all about the liability
right we just don't want to
have the town exposed in any way so it
really in my head it always came down to
Kera now Jeff has other issues that he's
not wrong you know um are do we we have
appropriate level of personnel what
happens when we have some flat and some
tires those are all things to me um
they're actual they're they're issues
that's the reality I think they can be
they can be overcome my my issue is is
if the liability if the town does not
absorb any significant level of
liability and Eric what I would ask
kerma is
and when is your due date on the grant
what is the
timeline
uh well what do you mean by that well if
we don't approve this if we don't
approve this tonight and and we pushed
it to June are you in you in an issue
related to the
grant uh I don't know whether they would
would I don't know well this we already
have the grant when do when do we need
the acceptance signatures
what sorry I was I was talking when we
already have the grant when do you need
acceptance
signatures uh they wanted them a couple
of weeks
ago okay
um well listen I I if kerma sign the
waiver the next question I would ask
kerma I would just ask kerma if someone
died what is the exposure to the
community I I would just go all the way
to the very end and just say what if
what if someone what if the worst thing
happened person had ebike uh they were
riding got struck killed what would the
town face none of us want that but
there's liability in anything that gets
done in the community everybody walking
across roads I mean know and obviously
there's liability structures for for
walkways and all that stuff but this is
a different issue this is something
we're just concerned about I think
everybody's concerned about it
um if kerma came back and said if
someone died
you know this is then they signed the
waiver this is what would
occur I I would be okay with it so Jeff
I wouldn't have a problem if we had a
mechanic or somebody verifying these
bikes were in great mechanical condition
every time they were taken out the
problem happens if somebody uses it and
causes damage to it doesn't say anything
Returns the bike and it is damaged the
brakes or something like that and it's
not caught and somebody does take the
bicycle out and gets in an accident we
are liable because you know we're we're
giving that
the impression that that bikee is is in
good mechanical condition and ready for
the
road and and that's what kind of worries
me that we don't have anybody there
that's capable of verifying that they're
in good shape and they're in suitable
condition to be out on the road and
another thing is I'd be more comfortable
with kerma if you know we did take these
models of bikes we sent them pictures
and say these are the models of bikes
we're going to have are you still okay
with this because I don't I think
there's a fun fundamental disconnect
there over over what an ebike is and the
speeds that these bikes are going to be
going and I just want to make sure that
we're going to be insured for that
because if if kerma comes back and says
well those aren't the bikes we were
thinking about but that's not what you
told us I want to make sure that we're
going to get insured for those models
and those types of bikes okay uh if had
a regular pedal bike and I left the town
hall and I went left by the time I hit
the base of that Hill I'd be going twice
the maximum governed speed of an ebike
so Eric Eric totally understand totally
get it and and you got you and Jeff are
total cyclists the rest of us are trying
to understand what's up what what Jeff
is asking you what Jeff is asking you is
legitimate
request even the waivers need to
specifically identify the the the
the the
U bikes that we're going to be if we do
this be using in the program because he
he you know
he's not wrong I mean I know the
insurance companies you know it comes
down to us understanding the insurance
company understands every aspect of what
we're trying to get to and and really it
comes down to somebody gets killed are
we covered somebody gets killed and
we're covered with these bikes and I
have no problem I personally have no
problem doing it because Jeff on I I
don't think um
what if the mechanic didn't what if the
mechanic didn't uh properly tighten up
the disc brake in the front and the guy
smash the manufacturer could have done
the same thing and and then you know you
go through the whole thing when people
sue people Sue but the issue is that I
would also I would go we don't have to
loan the bikes out to anyone we don't
have to rent the bikes out to anyone
right we can sit there and say you're
not qualified now the question is who's
doing that in town and that's the
employee issue that Jeff raises which
are all good things but I still come
back to I would still go through it
because everything's a risk everything's
a gamble if it's being paid for out not
outside of tax dollars other
than than uh managing the program I'm I
am good with it because we're offering
up something different uh some other
type of recreation to mostly seniors and
I would assume Eric we're going to have
a age limit on
these yeah wouldn't let anybody rent one
older than 90 I mean well was what I was
asking I wasn't asking for a
top L end like 18 18 to I mean make it
adults you what age do you want to set
to it 21 21 fine done I yeah go ahead
can I put in my two cents here sure um I
guess I'm not thinking so much about
maybe the liability I'm thinking about
the roads in our
town most of them are narrow no
shoulders no sidewalks and where are
people going to go with these things if
you have a rental thing or loan or thing
you're going to end up with all these
people on the road with bikes and it's
going to cause all sorts of congestion
and just as a
driver in a car I don't like having to
go around bikes like this um I I'm I'm
not for it because I don't care to see
that many bikes on the road I rode bikes
as a kid I bikes until I was my 20 how
many bikes not in a country town like
this are we talking two bikes three
bikes probably
three yeah I don't necessarily know that
three bikes will cause congestion within
our town and and that's a
good I think Eric has done a very good
job trying to identify bikes and trying
to put bike signs up all over the place
I mean I personally dislike
cars that get too close to Walkers and
bikers it bothers me immensely but three
bikes is not going to cause congestion
on and over roads no I mean I shouldn't
have used that term probably I guess
don't care to add any bikes onto the
road um okay okay that's your opinion I
I I I'm okay with it I just don't
I'm just to correct that the state law
has bikes have the same rights and
duties as cars and it's just that the
cars don't give the bikes enough room a
lot of the time I mean commuting I'm
going to ride to work tomorrow morning
to East Harford and it's um I I get a
close call every day it's just it's a
given somebody's gonna pull out in front
of me somebody's right turn into me it's
it's a given and if you don't anticipate
it you're gonna get hit and that's one
thing I'm concerned about somebody's
buzzing Along on these things and
they're not really paying attention
because they're not really putting the
work in and somebody's going to cut in
front of and they're not going to have
the handling skills to stop in time or
avoid it and we're going to have a
collision did um
and and and listen we're not making a
decision today in my mind we're having
this conversation so everybody can voice
their opinion and Eric I would sit there
and I would ask you to go back to Kera
put the brands and the types of bikes
that that that were going to be
potentially used in this program in the
waiver and then ask the specific
question if someone dies what is the
exposure the town what is the liability
the town could face and just give us
answer on that and then we can vote on
it up or down because I don't think
anybody I mean we might have two
negative votes already we might have
three negative votes already but it's a
it's a grant it's somebody else's it's
state money or federal money and I think
it's something that we really should
consider will there
be let I'm just I'm asking us to take
like 16 steps backwards here just
because of the timing of things will
there be another opport for a grant like
this like what if
we I know we want to we want to answer
that question you know what happens God
forbid somebody dies but what if we go
with Jeff Murray's suggestion on taking
the grant money this time and using it
for something different get all our
answers and our concerns in place with
who's going to be the mechanic and where
we're going to house these will there be
another grant that maybe we can use in
the future I I just I don't want to rush
into this I I have no idea Paula um I
got this because I was willing to jump
on it within a week or two of when the
state released the first funding because
they had a very fast initial deadline
and I met that and I got it do I know in
a month from now I know they're pushing
to have all the money spent by the end
of the fiscal year so can I turn around
and write a another grant for something
completely different um and get it
funded I don't know um if you turn it
down today I'm going to notify kog that
we're turning down the Grant I don't
really have any other option because
they're not going to sit there sit on
the money for us to spend the next you
know six months deciding whether we
wanted to program and look you're the
board if you decide you're not
comfortable with this vote it up vote it
down let's move on because I mean this
is you know it's a pretty simple program
kera's told us they're going to cover us
you know and they've said what they want
to see in the waiver um to maximize
their protection as an insurance company
there's not a whole lot else I can give
you um so if it's not acceptable this
month putting it off a month isn't going
to do any good anyway so if you're not
comfortable with it vote it down let's
move on I think we're just yeah we're
just trying to understand we're we've
got two cyclists that are giving us
conflicting info that this is my my
thoughts and what I'm trying to
understand I have two people that I that
I trust that are cyclists I'm getting
conflicting info so I'm just trying to
understand yep and I commute daily on an
ebike so couple more last questions and
then we'll move
on are I I think this was already
answered but I wanted to have a quick
discussion are there other towns in the
area that have this program with
ebikes not exactly like this not locally
I gave you all contact information for a
program that's been running for many
years in Ohio that is starting to adopt
ebikes they've been running ebikes for
about a year uh on a program fairly
similar to what they are other than they
use their Librarians and they check out
bikes like like
books yeah Paul there's no program in
Connecticut or New England that I could
find and um most of these companies that
do this are are third-party private
companies that go into places like line
bike and Harford and some of these
rental scooter companies and in Boston
and Nashville and some of the bigger
cities and they're they just basically
contract with the city to provide the
bikes and they're a standalone company
and so the municipalities don't run it
so I was trying to find something in
this in the whole area that was similar
to this and we would be the first of
anybody in New England doing this or
even this east of the this in the
Eastern Seaboard so that's why I'm a
little nervous about it there's no model
or success rate of these things and you
know the crash data and everything just
got me a little nervous that's all and I
just really I just really don't want to
expose the taxpayers in town to that
kind of
liability I love I love the idea but
Jeff you made me excited we would be we
would be leaders we would be leaders
first we' be the first one soon oh my
God I'd be so excited but there's a
reason that other towns aren't doing it
and we need to find out why Eric from
from my please please find out the
issues with the in the last two issues I
have for the insurance company are the
issues that Jeff raised understanding
that these are the bike the bikes the
actual models and the speeds and
everything else so we're talking about
class one ebikes which is the lowest
rated class of ebikes I I'm great but
what Jeff Mur what Jeff Murray is
expressing is accurate these are the
exact bikes you're riding the waiver for
these exact
bikes okay you know what I'll just turn
the grant down and we'll move on we're
not Eric Eric Eric I'm asking you to do
two things it's not really hard they'll
bikes in the waiver make sure the kerma
understands it and what happens if
someone gets in an accident and dies
that's it you can send us an email
tomorrow and we can all correspond on
this and make a decision yeah if if if
it comes back fine are we all on board
with the bbike program then well if you
want to make a motion if those two
things are are are done it's a question
of honestly whether you me and Paul all
vote together because Jeff Murray's
stated his opinion no an has stated her
opinion no I mean that's is just a
question I'll make a motion I'll make a
motion move forward with the ebike
program contingent on Eric getting um
kerma to approve the exact models to be
purchased and to give us a an
understanding of a catastrophic incident
and what would occur to the town's
taxpayers and you can add to this this
won't start until we get a an
appropriate person run
the
correct I mean that's that's to be
understood that it's not going to start
unless we get an affirmative answer on
both those questions that they'll cover
the bikes and that the exposure to the
town is not
catastrophic yeah and to
and to me catastrophic
is any extra
money okay well I will reach out to to
Prague and if they're willing to delay
implementation I will ask those
questions of kerma because I kind of
agreed I would give them a response
tomorrow morning you can tell them what
we said we're and we're gonna if did you
second that
Scott did you second that yes okay so as
a board any further discussion on this
all right all those in favor I I okay
all those
opposed all those that
abstain and abstains okay all right so a
311 um Eric please get us the
information email it all to us and then
we can sit there and and work our way
through
that all right I'll see whether Cog will
sit on it for another well you're not
telling kog they're going to sit on it
you're telling kog that you're getting
one more piece of information for the
board of Selectmen and it's been
approved right and if it gets if you get
a negative answer from kerma then we're
going to tell you okay then tell kog
it's we're not GNA take it but mind
we're taking it as long as you get us
positive
answers
okay all right
um nine new business discussing back on
the following and 9A road closure for
Cider Mill Memorial Day Road Board of
Selectmen acting as a local traffic
Authority do we need to make a motion on
this
Eric if you want to allow him to close
the road then yes I did not see that in
our package that
motion no was it did I miss it no there
is no motion they asked me whether they
could close the road I said that's not
my choice that's the local tra traffic
Authority so um make a motion that we
allow uh the road um the road closure
for Cider Mill for the Memorial Day
Parade a second all right all those
further discussion all those in favor I
I on on along on the same topic I've
talked to some of you about the parade
so the thought process was maybe we all
March together so I don't know if we
want to talk about that tonight or
another time but John McCall is looking
to get some information back to him on
who's available and what we're going to
be doing that day so um I will get you
my schedule I know I saw Jeff Murray
respond on the car issue so I know
there's other some of us that may may or
may not be here so if we can all
communicate with Paula individually that
would be
great okay
um nineb the job description for the
senior community center director
um I read it it was in our package uh
does anybody have any issues related to
the job
description all right so um I'll make a
motion that we authorize Eric to utilize
the job description to hire a community
center
director I'll second second all right um
all those in favor I
okay five
nothing uh can I ask one further
question related to that is who do you
want the interview panel to be for that
position well well you would be on it
and we'll sit there and identify where
we're at what What's the timing so it's
May 13th are you anticipating putting
this out and then having the interview
sometime in June what is your plan uh
well it's going to depends somewhat on
tomorrow but presuming the budget passes
tomorrow I would plan on this going in
the River East not this Friday but the
following Friday and then advertising it
Statewide um through CCM and
crop um why don't you reach out to um I
mean I I would I would participate if if
you needed it um I would sit there and
just reach out to individuals that you
might want
I mean you know interview panels of more
than three you know five
are kind unre wieldly unwieldly wieldly
is it unwieldly or wieldly
no um not a good idea how about that not
a good idea yeah so Reach Out Eric and
and whoever wants to participate as long
as they meet your criteria for the
numbers no problem and you probably
should reach out to one of the other
communities Columbia or Hein and get
somebody from their Rec Department to
sit there and assist with the
interviews okay um 9C proposed Community
Center policies I didn't see that really
in the um package I would ask you Eric
to um send out
your that's page 31 of the packet um if
they're in page 31 and I didn't see them
what I would ask is I would like to sit
there and evaluate
them uh I thought that was all part of
your
qualifications uh no the job
description no so my my concern is I've
got a lot of requests from various
different groups who all are convinced
they're going to be allowed to store
stuff in the community it was your
storage policy then oh policy I was
stage policy
yes Le let's go back on that because you
and I had a conversation about the
new um stage policy take it's going to
take a while to get built but the new
um facility for the buses at the old
Community Center the old
fire that's where storage has to be I
mean that's the only place it's going to
work it's not going to go in the new
community center we're not going to let
people sit there and dump stuff in that
building um you and I Eric had a
conversation about extending the height
on the second floor of that that
building where the buses are going to be
parked so we could have garage doors and
then identify a garage door for each
group that needs it so the seniors can
get one the recommission can get another
the town can get another um you know
just as a a storage place and and that
I think mentally is the only place I can
Envision where storage really will work
in town because it can't go in the town
hall it can't go to the new community
center and anybody asking for storage is
has to understand that we're not going
to let it become
cluttered unless anybody's against that
theory no when we were doing the whole
bus thing we decided that with upstairs
was going to be mostly
for yeah it should be and and I had
touched
Eric Eric and I I forgot when we were
doing it but I was like we raised the
roof to be the the second floor so that
you can provide additional storage for
Community organizations and just say Hey
listen this is your 100 square feet or
200 square feet or whatever you can give
them um and here's your garage door
access and in the middle put chain link
fence to to separate side to side that's
cheapest way it works at warehouse that
I've had to deal with and go from
[Music]
there but anybody that's asking you for
storage at the new community center you
can tell them the board of Select at
least
uh I would assume you're all we're all
on the same page you can tell them the
board of selectman is not going to allow
that facility to get
cluttered all right period
um are there any other issues on the the
proposed Community Center storage
policies nope are you okay with signing
it and putting that actually in place or
do you just want to keep it oral
tradition or what do you want to
do
um thought you already signed
it uh let let me read it let me read it
and I'm pretty sure I'll I'll sign it
does anybody on the board of Selectmen
have a problem with me signing that
letter or something close
okay good we'll get it done Eric um
we'll get it done this
week okay all right um there was a
vendor permit in here for Solar Company
William bars from Trinity
solar
um hadn't this been hadn't Trinity solar
been up before or is this a new company
uh no I I believe it's just a different
person from the same
company I don't know I I never met the
individual so I I really don't know
them okay um I believe we approved the
last one does anyone want to make a
motion to approve
this I make a motion to approve I don't
what are we calling this vendor permit
vendor permit vendor permit for William
bars
of um Trinity
solar I'll second okay all those in
favor I I okay those oppos no all those
abstain no okay uh
9e um Charter revision committee uh we
need to um make a motion
to establish the initial um hearing dat
yeah public hearing
date so do you want me to put up uh the
town's attorney's motion what he's
recommending you approve put up the
motion and the legal notice for uh
publication in the River
East okay I think that's it that's it
so that just sat there and you
know erot it
U so I'll just make a motion that we we
uh I'll make a
motion to implement uh the legal
requirements of the charter revision
commission and
authorize uh legal notice to be posted
by the town clerk to a set a special
meeting to be held on May
22nd and using the the the language
provided by the town
attorney second time
uh all those in favor I I okay um so
Eric you'll sit there and give I know
Carol has the legal notice so the motion
was written by Dennis you can date it
approved five nothing and then
um uh because of the timing of that
hearing um I I think it's appropriate
the the board discussed um items that we
would like the charter division
commission to um to look at uh as Dennis
discussed at
the the previous meeting that we held to
appoint committee members
um if we can sit there and have those
issues we can sit there and and request
that the charter revision commission
U look at those
issues anybody
right from from my standpoint I'm uh
there are a lot of dates that I sit
there and look at from the charter that
I would like to sit there and see
Consolidated or or timed out
appropriately so we
are uh in line one of those is November
codifying the November elections so that
we have November elections within our
town and then um one of the other things
as far as far as timing goes is trying
to get
the
um trying to get the budget referendums
to line up with the ram budget
referendum so that there's only one day
of voting if at all possible
um that and just governmental
efficiencies that I would like to sit
there and see be put in place to sit
there
and uh make us work as efficiently as we
possibly
can anybody else you have my list okay
we'll provide your list to the to the
group anybody
else okay um so the timing of what's
going to occur is um the legal notice is
going to go in the paper we'll have a
meeting on the 22nd of May um that
meeting will fall into three Parts
there'll be one the beginning of the
meeting will be for the committee to
elect um a chairperson and a vice
chairperson there'll be the public
hearing to get community input as to
Charter revision and what it means and
what they would like to see and then
there'll be a meeting after that of the
charter revision committee to sit there
and set a schedule as to how to get
together and what to
do that's it anybody have anything else
related to the Charter revision
committee um did we specifically say
just now what what is going to be
F uh it's all verbal Paula so you can
say anything you want and they're going
to sit there and evaluate Jeff Murray
wrote his down because he did that
before we even established the charter
revision committee to begin with I mean
if you'd like to you write them down I
mean Dennis what Dennis didn't want to
have happen was um that the board as a
total group
wrote six or seven things that they had
to undertake and then those things have
to be sat there and specifically
undertaken by the board or by the
committee so he was like I mean just
like we did the last time um we didn't
write anything down we just
told the chairperson what we were
interested in doing and they executed
it
okay my my concern or thought is just
everybody knows that we've got a limited
amount of time I just don't want to
overload the committee with a bunch of
tasks y that's that's my thought I I
agree with you I think we should
streamline as best as we can the number
of um meetings with having people come
and vote and doing things like that for
sure so but I don't want to give them
verbally five different tasks to to try
and accomplish in a shorter period of
time so understood
so the verbal tasks that we're talking
about tonight as soon as they come out
of our mouth
they're well you're gonna be able to
obtain you're going to be able to attend
all the meetings if you choose to anyway
but
um you know the goal of the last group
was you know what we expressed was a
potential bifurcation of the budget that
went to the town the the the charter
revision committee and that actually got
executed and it came back and it got
passed by the voter so it ended up being
five things that that Charter revision
committee did or six things that they
put out and five of them got approved
and I would anticipate that that would
be the same way that this would occur
this time they would be
small sections to sit there and get
voted on and sit there and see what we
can do the biggest issue is that
um as Jeff has expressed and Paul has
expressed trying not to do too much
um but if we stretch a little bit and
we're the first out there and it gets
voted down it gets voted down that's de
democracy I mean to be really honest I
wasn't in favor of the bifurcation we
put it up to allow people to vote on it
it got voted on and won that's part of
the charter so that's right I'm okay I'm
okay with the Democratic process if if
you lose you lose so right okay we all
work together
all
right we can move on
to item 10 now approval of the minute
the meeting minutes for 411 2024 they
were it was a special
meeting anybody want make a
motion I'm looking
for um I make a motion to accept the
special meeting minutes of um April 11th
second rightor may seconded all those in
favor
I okay so now we're going to go on to uh
the treasurer's report does anybody have
any specific questions related to the
treasurer's
report
okay um
Eric just just a question for me are the
revenues the revenues are not split in
the budget line that's the total year-to
date so right now we have
uncollected um we're short
$115,000 in total revenue
correct uh that wouldn't surprise
me hang
on I fast forward it too far uh it's uh
page 45 of the
packet so I just want to make sure that
this is the year-to day budget number
it's 12,
434 12,
434,881
were as of April so we have May and June
to collect
115,000 to be equal with our budgeted
number or exceed
it yeah that seems about right right um
and then if I and then if I go down to
the tax collector side
right the tax collector wrote us some
information saying how much money we had
to collect we still
have we still have
$370,000 of total taxes to collect for
last year
Accord so you're wondering why those two
numbers aren't the same in no no no no
it's a budget I'm not asking that what
I'm asking is we are really close to our
Revenue number with two months to go
that's all I'm saying correct but there
there's two factors into that the first
is uh in any given year we don't collect
100% of the taxes so that's that shows
up as a deficit but we also don't
account for the supplemental appropriate
not supplemental appropriation but the
supplemental tax bill and those two
every year just about balance each other
out so that's why you see us 100,000
down now while we haven't collected 300
something thousand in taxes because
we've gotten in a couple hundred, on the
of supplemental taxes which we're not
accounting for um it's a simplification
but those two things usually just about
balance out every year
okay actually let's look at
that yeah it's pretty close I
[Music]
mean if you go and bounce I mean this is
just for for accounting kind of nerds
things don't line up things make sense
don't make sense so right now the the
the
page 45 says we collected
9,934 367 of taxes including leans
supplemental motor
vehicle and then you go to the tax
collector's report and those numbers
that are in the middle of the page don't
it says 9, 660,000
so those are always where I have
problems where things don't match
but we'll get on it um
but I like the information provided by
the treasurer in that department and if
we you know and in this information
that's on page 45 reconciles to the bank
and Eric we are reconciling we are
reconciling so we are reconciled for the
month of
April uh far as I know Perfect all right
anybody else have any other questions
related to the treasurer's reports
nope so we go all the way to the bottom
which is page
um I mean we have other things that we
have to
spend uh those transfers are already
made
okay right Eric what um any information
you can provide us next month as to um
if we're short anywhere or I would
assume next month you're going to come
to us with any internal transfers you
need to
make uh
yes maybe
uh it's the only month you got left Eric
I I understand that
but but we can actually do the transfers
after July one we just gotta stop
spending money after July one got it
all right uh Tax Collector's report
which starts on page
57 so as I was saying that this is the
information page 57 is the information
off of the
um what's the name of the software
Eric oh God you're killing me I mean
it's used by the assessor's office and
the text color and the tax collector um
I'm blanking on it at the moment I'm
sorry I blanked on it too not Vision
appraisal it's the other one it's it's
the company that that sends out all of
the the bills and right they do all that
work so okay I should know it um
so $10 million of total billing 9
million6 of collections
$370,000 of remaining to be collected
for from the current year there's other
bills that are out there if you look at
page 58 you look at the bottom of page
58 there's
$684,000 of uncollected taxes and it
lists all the years that relate to and
and then the tax color sent us
information about uh delinquent tax
bills and what her plan is related to
that does anyone have any questions
related to
that okay so are you generally in favor
of authorizing the tax collector to use
a state Marshall um to do Alias tax
warrants um to actually go after
people and I am what are the related
fees to that so the related fees are
paid by the person that owes the taxes
not the town the town is held harmless
with this whatever they collect the town
gets okay uh I would I have no problem
doing it
but what you know especially car taxes
go get it because if you
know what about uh leans have we applied
leans on all of the old
delinquent real estate
taxes uh there should be leans on
everything other than the latest round
the ones that were just uh delinquent as
of May 1 those there's a specific date
cut off um they've all been sent
delinquency
notices um and told that they're about
to get put on the they're about to get
lean in fact I've gotten a couple Panic
calls from residents that are very upset
that their property is going to get lean
um but that's not is life it's it's a
certain number of days after it's due
and I don't remember what that exact
date is is I want to say it's 35 but I
could be wrong on that um but yeah they
do get automatically
filed
um I mean I know we probably haven't
done Alias tax warrants in
years when's the last time we did them
five or six years ago Alias tax warrants
we haven't done under since I've been
here we were used
a collection agency to go after people
but that wasn't really all that
successful they didn't really collect
all that
much
um you know they got a lot of people
wound up but they didn't get a lot of
cash so just so that you know a state
Marshall has the ability to seize bank
accounts to pay the bills so if he can
figure out where a person is
and and figure out who they bank with he
can go in and seize the money that they
have to pay the town's
debts um so it's it's definitely a a
fairly
aggressive
um okay anybody have a problem with
that like a
great I'll make a motion that we uh
allow the tax collector to to
um
utilize the Alias tax
warrant process
I'll all right
further well we'll give it to you
Scott further discussion on this
topic no all those in favor
I okay all right um there were
departmental reports within uh our
package um anybody have any questions on
any of them one more thing we need to
apply there's a I make a motion that we
provide
uh a tax refund for excess payments to
Enterprise FM Trust of
$467
7 I'll second all a second so all those
in favor I
okay uh anybody have any other questions
on Department
reports okay Eric is there anything that
you want to point out on any of the
department reports to us nope nothing in
particular
[Music]
um what's that so just so we understand
this because we talked to the assessor
let's talk about this page U page 64
Eric that is the board of assessment
appeals or what is this
baac summary are those are those uh
reductions and assessment granted by the
board of assessment appeals or those
granted by the assessors
those some of those are uh by if it says
baa change those are ones where the
board of assessment appeals has lowered
the assessment of a
property um if it's just C it's
something else it's either sold to a
different owner or um something that got
added or something got subtracted by the
office because they realized there was
an error or a car got added or
subtracted okay so when I'm looking at
the the 353 Lake Road property there's a
$91,000
reduction granted by the board of
assessment appeals is that on the house
that has the three-car garage or is that
that the one that has the structure that
has
issues uh that is the one that is
currently
um does not have a certificate of
occupancy that's the new
one
okay they appealed their assessment and
use the same appraiser everybody does
when they want to show that their house
is worthless and the baa agreed with
them okay
but those are the only two that came to
the ba and got
approved uh as far as I know in this
period yes okay anybody else have any
other
questions any other questions on any of
the department
reports all right Eric is there any
correspondence uh the only
correspondence I had was related to
Joshua trust that's in the
packet and uh I did get a letter from
Mrs post who seems to be mad at quite a
few things um most most of which is
under the control of zoning so I have
file F followed up with both the zoning
agent and the wetlands agent to attempt
to address her concerns she also had
some concerns over the future of
Hutchinson room
I uh I I've been handling that situation
just to let everybody
know okay for Mrs
post for Mrs post or for the town for I
was helping Mrs Serenity Post yes her
agent Scott so you're on the zoning
board and you're helping Mrs no no no no
no no no I I I went down there and
inspected something for her and then
then that she asked me to check for and
I checked into it and then I got the
appropriate people down there and they
went and did their due diligence okay so
so more this the taxpayer reached out to
you as your role and as your
relationship with her exactly assisting
to sit there and get the right decisions
made assisting the town yeah the town
went and did exactly right thing and
everything is handled okay and is she
happy with her current situation
yes
okay
[Music]
um Eric what are the pictures at the
bottom like of the of the Culvert which
Culvert are we dealing with so that was
a cul that was repaired on uh Bunker
Hill Road yeah a smaller Culver on
Bunker Hill Road that had some uh
significant erosion at the
downstream uh part of the pipe that
public works then filled in and rebuilt
the banks okay got it with approval of
all that all of that rock input is
public works corre rocks in there
rebuild the wall correct okay um so if
there's no correspondence and and we're
good I think we'll move on to uh public
speak one second I'm just trying to fit
through my stuff so um we'll start with
Diane
Grenier I'm all set thank you very much
always
entertaining you're welcome Diane glad
we can uh make you laugh I would guess
is what we probably do uh Bill Penn
um I think I going to say but I think
I'll just let them pass thank you all
for your time and energy and uh
addressing all these things for the town
thank you all right thank you Bill um
Leanne
[Music]
Hutchinson yes um I'd like to address um
a couple of things that you spoke about
tonight one is the um Senior Center and
the community center and the other is to
Bunker Hill and hop River natural gas
activity which apparently it sounds like
just came to some people's attention
including mine
tonight um I appreciate as far as that
item goes that you are going to look
into it quite a bit more it sounds like
um to back up for a second I living on
Bunker Hill Road I can't imagine that
the road is proposed to be closed for as
long as it is just due to the small size
of the bridge so I'm hoping that
anything that can alleviate that will be
done um because it's already stressful
for people to have to travel around and
then also it's it's stressful to worry
about the fire and Emergency Services
possibly having to come from centry um
due to any closure on Bunker Hill Road
Bridge as it is so I appreciate whatever
you can do with this natural gas
activity I don't know what else to call
it um on Hop River Road because if there
is going to be increased traffic people
in Bunker Hill Road if there's any issue
with going down to Parker Bridge Road or
if you're going toward the Willam manic
area some people do use hop River
Road so again if there's some sort of
project going on there any information
we could have and traffic control if
that becomes an issue it's is going to
be very helpful um regarding the senior
center I understand that you want to do
as much as possible with volunteers and
that's I ideal um I used to work in a
senior center I did programming it's um
programming itself there were things
that go on um you know several times a
week card games exercises those are
usually done all the time and there are
things like trips and onetime speakers
and onetime activities that are a
different category of programming and um
I was going to use the word unwielding
until Jeff or somebody used it already
but I just my thought at reading this at
first is that having as many people and
I know you've already voted tonight is
going to be a little bit unwieldy
especially since this is a new project
for everyone so I
just um as a citizen I'm wondering if a
couple of these
committees um who already do important
work could have more emphasis maybe
later on like maybe the library and the
beautification Committees because while
they have a role
um um I just wouldn't want to see a
senior senator director come in and as
you already discussed again tonight um
who's going to be in
charge and again with regard to um
committees and volunteers um especially
with Kathy pazzy with all the work that
she does stepping back I hope there's
going to be a focus on not just
volunteering but somebody in charge of
Transportation somebody in charge of
something as it sounds basic but it's
important as a receptionist um somebody
answering the phone I know Eric has an
awful lot on his plate and usually
answers his own phone um so I really
appreciate that but um you know again
because it's new I think a lot of it is
unknown and I think if we have a little
more Direction that's going to be very
helpful all right appreciate it thank
you very much uh Ed sizzle
yes good evening everyone I want to
compliment or add on to Bill pens uh
thank you for all of your hard dedicated
hours of volunteer work um for the town
it's amazing how much work you guys get
done uh and just want to address the
concerns valid many valid concerns
raised by Jeff and an regarding safety
and uh traffic congestion with bicycles
on the road uh to both of those comments
I'd like to say that if we can get the
uh eventually get our Muse pathway down
Route
316 uh obviously we can get all the
bikes off the road and go down multi use
dedicated pathway onto the rail trail
and get to all forers four corners of
our town on an ebike uh safely to
address the safety concerns and we could
even uh of course uh guar U request and
that the initial users of those bikes
stay on the safe area such as the bike
paths around Andover Lake the multi used
pathway and the rail trail and keep them
off these streets for starters anyway so
we can we can we can address those
concerns in creative ways and in terms
of Jeff Maguire's comment I really like
his idea of being Innovative and being
the first to do something like this I
think it's worth our while thank
you okay uh Joanne
Ebert gosh I hate to follow that because
I'm kind of the total opposite opinion I
appreciate the idea and you know
thinking outside the box and bringing
more things to Andover but I just think
that the whole liability thing is I
couldn't agree with Jeff Murray more um
I have a couple Bic bicyclists
enthusiasts and my family too they're
constantly working on their bikes too to
maintain them and keep them ready for
whether it's in the trails or on the
roads or whatever and I I'm more worried
for the town right now because we for
such a small town we have so many
projects going and um I just want to see
them all run well and I don't know who
would oversee the ebikes I just don't
find it necessary you know is it going
to be one of those things that hopefully
it's the community director or whatever
who's going to know who's out I
understand there's only three of them I
just think it's unnecessary I'm really
worried about the liability um whether
there's a waiver or not because we all
know things that go to law lawsuits
anyways and if it was so Innovative and
exciting in such a New England part of
the country that loves hiking and biking
and all those kind of things we would
see it in at least one other town and we
don't and there's a reason so that's my
opinion thank you all right thank you
very much and last but not least we have
Steve
okay Steve you got five seconds one two
three four five sold all right um thank
you very much everyone for attending and
the public for uh providing uh necessary
backup for us and let us understand
what's what everybody's
thinking
um that's it uh
uh item 16 is executive session but we
don't have anything to to go into
executive session about today do we
Eric not that I know of there there was
one thing I was contemplating but I
didn't get my act together to present it
anyway so all right doesn't matter so
now we're on to item 17
adjournment ation toour a second all a
second all those in favor I
all right thank you very much everybody
uh we'll be communicating on the other
other issues thank you